[Amit Varma]: A few days ago, I was invited to a rock concert at the State Bank of India. Yes, that's
[Amit Varma]: right, the SBI. At the concert, I was told a super group would be performing, consisting
[Amit Varma]: of musicians drawn from all the public sector banks of India. The concert was supposed to
[Amit Varma]: start at seven in the evening, and I got there at seven to find that I was the only person
[Amit Varma]: there. Then eventually, the arena filled up. And at 9pm, the band finally got up on stage.
[Amit Varma]: It was a seven man band. There was one singer, two guitarists, a bassist, a keyboardist,
[Amit Varma]: a saxophonist, and a drummer. A soundcheck happened as men with safari suits got ready
[Amit Varma]: to headbang in the mosh pit. Then the band started playing. Or rather, two of the seven
[Amit Varma]: men in the band started playing. The saxophonist started doing pa-pa-pa, and the drummer was
[Amit Varma]: doing his own thing. The vocalist, the two guitarists, the bassist, and the keyboardist
[Amit Varma]: all stood around doing nothing. The men in safari suits in the mosh pit were all headbanging
[Amit Varma]: away to some imagined music. I turned and asked a fellow next to me, what's going on?
[Amit Varma]: Why are these chaps not doing anything on stage? He turned to me and replied, they are
[Amit Varma]: non-performing assets.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Bhadwa.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen. Today's episode is about non-performing assets or
[Amit Varma]: NPAs, as we call them. Now, all banks have bad loans, and they account for a certain
[Amit Varma]: amount of bad loans when they calculate business expenses. But in India, especially with public
[Amit Varma]: sector banks, NPAs have become a huge problem. To discuss this subject, I have with me today
[Amit Varma]: in the studio Vivek Kaul, a columnist who writes for Equity Master and various other
[Amit Varma]: publications, and Kumar Anand, an economist based in Mumbai. Vivek, Kumar, welcome to
[Amit Varma]: the show.
[Guest 1]: Happy to be here.
[Guest 1]: Thanks, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: Vivek, so today's episode is on NPAs. What are NPAs?
[Guest 1]: See, at a very basic level, without getting, you know, technical, any loan, which the borrower
[Guest 1]: hasn't repaid for 90 days or more, is basically an NPA.
[Guest 1]: Non-performing asset. It's an asset of the bank and it's non-performing.
[Guest 1]: Non-performing asset. And there are various, you know, categories within that.
[Amit Varma]: It's basically a bad loan.
[Amit Varma]: Is what it is. And Kumar, when we talk about the problem of NPAs in India, per se, I mean,
[Amit Varma]: NPAs are a problem everywhere. And, you know, banks account for it. You know, some of our
[Amit Varma]: loans will go bad and they account for it in the cost of business. Why is it specifically
[Amit Varma]: a problem in India?
[Guest 2]: As you rightly said, it's a problem everywhere. In India, what happens is that more than 70
[Guest 2]: percent of the banking is owned by the public sector, which is the government owned. And
[Guest 2]: government is not in the business of maximizing profits as a private sector bank would. So
[Guest 2]: their intentions are completely different. Their goals are different.
[Amit Varma]: So you're saying this NPA problem is really a public sector problem?
[Amit Varma]: Largely.
[Amit Varma]: So you've written an article for us, for the magazine Pragati at ThinkPragati.com, if any
[Amit Varma]: of the listeners are interested in checking it out, where Vivek, you'd spoken about the
[Amit Varma]: extent of the problem of NPAs in public sector banks. So can you share some of those figures
[Guest 1]: with us?
[Guest 1]: So basically, you know, what I had done was I had essentially taken the example of State
[Guest 1]: Bank of India, which is by far the largest bank and the largest public sector bank in
[Guest 1]: India. And I had looked at their bad loan numbers across different categories of loans.
[Guest 1]: So if you look at their bad loans, in case of home loans, it's at 0.43 percent. In case
[Guest 1]: of auto loans, it's at 0.65 percent. In case of retail loans as a whole, it's around 0.55
[Guest 1]: percent.
[Guest 1]: But the moment you look at lending to industry, you know, where the quantum of the loan is
[Guest 1]: very, very high, the bad loan rates tend to go up. So if you look at, you know, lending
[Guest 1]: to large corporates, the bad loan rates close to 7 to 8 percent. For mid-level corporates,
[Guest 1]: it's close to 19 percent, which basically means that out of 100 rupees loans given to
[Guest 1]: mid-level corporates, loans worth 20 rupees have been defaulted on.
[Guest 1]: So the question here is that, you know, why is a public sector bank carrying out, you
[Guest 1]: know, lending in a very good way when it comes to the retail borrower, but in a very screwed
[Guest 1]: up way when it comes to the big industrial borrower.
[Guest 1]: Now if you compare, if you look at the overall bad loans rate of SBI, it's around 6.9 percent.
[Guest 1]: Now compare this to HDFC Bank, their overall bad loans rate is just 1.1 percent. So why
[Guest 1]: is there such a significant difference, is a question worth asking.
[Guest 2]: So I think the difference could be accounted for by the different incentives which are
[Guest 2]: at play for an HDFC Bank versus an SBI. So State Bank of India's incentive is not to
[Guest 2]: maximize profits. While, I mean, in many of the stated government documents, they have
[Guest 2]: said that their goals are vague things like, you know, in financial inclusion or direction
[Guest 2]: of credit into certain areas like MSMEs or agriculture, while HDFC, for them, the underlying
[Guest 2]: thing, all the matters is what is their profit. So, and which keeps them very, very disciplined.
[Amit Varma]: While on the other hand, and even beyond, like even if SBI's stated intention was profit,
[Amit Varma]: if you actually look at the incentives at play, if you're an SBI employee, your job
[Amit Varma]: doesn't depend on your performance. It's a tenured position, you rise in the ranks according
[Amit Varma]: to seniority, it doesn't matter. Whereas in HDFC, if you make a series of irresponsible
[Amit Varma]: decisions that eventually goes into your record, you could lose your job. So the incentives
[Guest 1]: are very different.
[Guest 1]: But see, the interesting, the difference here is, if you look at the default rates of retail
[Guest 1]: loans in case of SBI, they're very, very low. So it's not like, so obviously, you know,
[Guest 1]: the guys who are giving out the retail loans of SBI, know their job. Well, before they
[Guest 1]: give out a retail loan, the due diligence is proper.
[Amit Varma]: So that's my question to you. Why different default rates, like for retail loans, for
[Amit Varma]: home loans, are very standard, and the public sector figures are not very different from
[Amit Varma]: the private sector figures in the case of bad loans? Why is it different?
[Guest 1]: So basically, you know, what you need to look at here is, is the fact that, you know, there's
[Guest 1]: an economist called Thomas Sowell, and he talks about this concept called knowledge
[Guest 1]: and power. Now, in public sector, people who have the knowledge to make decisions do not
[Guest 1]: always have the power to make a decision. Now, how does this work in the context of
[Guest 1]: state bank? When a state bank employee is giving out a retail loan, he obviously is
[Guest 1]: in a position to do proper due diligence and then decide whether the guy applying for a
[Guest 1]: loan deserves a loan or not.
[Guest 1]: Now when the guy giving out a corporate loan does due diligence, I mean, he has the knowledge
[Guest 1]: whether the particular borrower is in a position to repay or not. It's not that he does not
[Guest 1]: have the knowledge. It's just that he does not have the power to make the decision whether
[Guest 1]: that guy deserves a loan or not, because, you know, a lot of these guys, large corporates
[Guest 1]: are essentially crony capitalists who are close to politicians. So if their loans are
[Guest 1]: not cleared, the State Bank of India employee runs the risk of sort of being transferred
[Guest 1]: to one of the states which are probably very, very far away from cities like Delhi or Bombay
[Guest 1]: where all the action is. So that's the fundamental problem of knowledge and power.
[Guest 1]: The other thing is, you know, you can unleash your lawyers or your system on the small borrower.
[Guest 1]: You cannot unleash the lawyers on a large borrower, because the large borrower has access
[Guest 1]: to a better lawyer than you have.
[Amit Varma]: And to political protection.
[Amit Varma]: And political protection.
[Amit Varma]: So basically to sum it up, if I'm an HDFC manager, I have both knowledge and power.
[Amit Varma]: I do my due diligence and, you know, I get the knowledge that I get out of the market
[Amit Varma]: and out of, you know, looking at people's credit records and so on and so forth. I also
[Amit Varma]: have the power. If I want to deny him a loan, I can. But your point is that in the public
[Amit Varma]: sector banks, many of these big loans are politically influenced.
[Guest 1]: So in fact, you know, what also happens is a lot of these big guys who borrow, in fact,
[Guest 1]: in sectors like power and steel, padded up their costs. So what they did was when they
[Guest 1]: padded up their costs, they ended up borrowing more than what they needed. And they themselves
[Guest 1]: brought very little of their own money into the venture. And the moment they got the loan,
[Guest 1]: they essentially siphoned off, you know, the extra part of the loan and use that money
[Guest 1]: to pay off the, you know, their own money that they had put into the venture. So that
[Guest 1]: way, they had very little skin in the game.
[Guest 2]: Sounds like a classic Ponzi scheme.
[Amit Varma]: And probably contributed to the politicians coffers as well, so it's this game, you know.
[Amit Varma]: Money goes towards power, power goes into making money. And again, to clarify, a private
[Amit Varma]: sector bank would be far less likely to give those kind of loans where you could skim off
[Amit Varma]: a lot extra on the top simply because their incentives are tailored towards their doing
[Guest 2]: their due diligence.
[Guest 2]: Just to going back to the point of incentives, the public sector banks, the biggest one is
[Guest 2]: the government and the politicians who run the government, their incentive is re-election.
[Guest 2]: While in the case of private sector bank, the incentive is to maximize profits.
[Amit Varma]: Right. So the politician comes to power because he has been funded by different interest groups
[Amit Varma]: or crony capitalists, and he then rewards them by using the power he has in government
[Amit Varma]: in various ways, one of which is these kind of soft loans from public sector banks, which
[Amit Varma]: later become NPAs. And who suffers here most of all?
[Guest 2]: All of us.
[Amit Varma]: All of us schmucks, we poor janta. So going, you know, so this whole NPA problem and again,
[Amit Varma]: as you specified, it's really a public sector bank problem. What are the unseen effects
[Guest 2]: of it?
[Guest 2]: One of the things which comes to mind immediately is that the case of moral hazard.
[Guest 1]: So you know, the unseen effect, the first unseen effect is moral hazard. I mean, if
[Guest 1]: you look at a lot of corporates who are defaulting now or who are in major trouble, are essentially
[Guest 1]: the same guys who had defaulted in the late to mid 90s. Now, and this time around, they
[Guest 1]: have defaulted, you know, substantially larger amounts. So obviously, you know, they know
[Guest 1]: how the system works. I mean, there is no other reason as to, you know, why they would
[Guest 1]: have, you know, defaulted in the late 90s and defaulted larger amounts again, you know,
[Guest 1]: over the last few years. So there is a great moral hazard at work.
[Guest 1]: The other thing that happens is that, you know, it pushes up interest rates for the
[Guest 1]: borrowers. Now, how does that happen? I mean, you look at the RBI, you know, the Reserve
[Guest 1]: Bank of India cuts the repo rate and sends a message down to all the banks that guys,
[Guest 1]: you need to sort of start cutting your loan rates. Now, what the banks do is they cut
[Guest 1]: their deposit rates, but they don't cut their loan rates because the bad loans are
[Guest 1]: going up. So they try to sort of cushion that by increasing the margin between the rate
[Guest 1]: at which they borrow and the rate at which they lend. Now, when the rate at which they
[Guest 1]: lend remains the same, then the entire act of the Reserve Bank, you know, cutting the
[Guest 1]: repo rate and signaling lower interest rates goes for a toss.
[Guest 1]: The other thing that happens is, and this is something that, you know, Raghuram Rajan,
[Guest 1]: when he was the governor of the Reserve Bank of India made in a speech, and he made a very
[Guest 1]: interesting example of how, you know, a home loan borrower in India paid an average rate
[Guest 1]: of interest of 10 to 10.5%, whereas an average power company paid, you know, an interest
[Guest 1]: rate of 13.5%. So an individual was borrowing at a rate which was close to 300 basis points
[Guest 1]: lower than a power company. Now, what was happening there was that, you know, many power
[Guest 1]: companies were essentially defaulting on their loans. So those who were repaying their loans
[Guest 1]: on time, were essentially paying a higher rate of interest. So in a way they were compensating
[Guest 1]: to some extent for the guys who were defaulting on their loans.
[Amit Varma]: It's like the honest subsidizing the dishonest.
[Guest 1]: Very, very true. I mean, that's a very nice way of summarizing it.
[Guest 2]: And of course, the third unseen effect is the opportunity cost. So all the money which
[Guest 2]: politician running a public sector bank awards it to his cronies or it's what's as a favors
[Guest 2]: to his people who have financed their campaign or such, such things and would have been used
[Guest 2]: for other productive purposes. But those are now lost.
[Amit Varma]: So essentially, if my tax money had stayed with me, instead of being spent on all of
[Amit Varma]: this, I would have gone out and spend it in the economy would have grown in that way and
[Amit Varma]: more productive, positive some ways. So Vivek, that's a problem. What are the solutions like
[Guest 1]: what would you do to turn things around?
[Guest 1]: So, you know, today, in the business standard, there was a very interesting article which
[Guest 1]: said that the government is encouraging five public sector banks to tap funds from the
[Guest 1]: stock market. Obviously, you know, whether the stock market is willing to give them funds
[Guest 1]: is a very, you know, it's a different issue, but at least the government is encouraging,
[Guest 1]: you know, banks to sort of tap and get money from the stock market. So that is a step in
[Guest 1]: the right direction. The question is, the story did not answer was whether the government
[Guest 1]: is willing to dilute its stake below 51% if because the amount of capital that these banks
[Guest 1]: require in the years to come, especially with Basel III, you know, also coming in is going
[Guest 1]: to be huge. Now to give you some numbers, there was one research paper co-authored by
[Guest 1]: Viral Acharya, who is now the one of the deputy governors of the RBI. And he has various sort
[Guest 1]: of scenarios. And in one scenario, he and his co-author estimate that close to 10 lakh
[Guest 1]: crore will be required to recapitalise these banks. Now, 10 lakh crore to give you some
[Guest 1]: sense, you know, of how big the number is, is around twice the fiscal deficit that the
[Guest 1]: government of India will run this year. So the question is, where will this sort of money
[Guest 1]: come from? I mean, there are other estimates which are not as high as this estimate. I
[Guest 1]: mean, there is one another estimate of around 5 lakh 87,000 crores. Now, whatever I mean,
[Guest 1]: whether it's 5 lakh crores, or it's 10 lakh crores, it's a huge number, which the government
[Guest 1]: cannot generate. So the solution ultimately is to gradually privatise these banks. Now,
[Guest 1]: whether the government is willing to dilute its stake below 51% is the billion dollar
[Amit Varma]: question here.
[Amit Varma]: And that's kind of the crux, because the incentives are so messed up, because the government is
[Amit Varma]: in control. Unless they're independent, and the incentives are actually to seek profit,
[Guest 1]: this problem isn't going to sort of...
[Guest 1]: And see the other thing is that, you know, they think that, you know, public sector banks
[Guest 1]: are needed to run a lot of these social sector schemes, which is fair. But then having said
[Guest 1]: that, there is no need for the government to be running, you know, 20 odd banks. I mean,
[Guest 1]: you can have five banks, you don't need to own 20 banks.
[Guest 2]: I don't think even to run those schemes, you need to have banks. I mean, governments all
[Guest 2]: around the world have public schemes, but for them, they don't need to own banks.
[Guest 1]: I agree with you on that point. My point is, you know, a lot of ideas, which are economically
[Guest 1]: feasible are not politically feasible. So for an idea to be politically, I mean, I thought
[Guest 1]: I am giving a politically feasible idea wherein, okay, you know, you want to own the State
[Guest 1]: Bank of India, fair enough, you own the State Bank of India, you own four other big banks,
[Guest 1]: which are, you know, let's say one big bank in South India, one in West, one in North,
[Guest 1]: one in East, you don't have to own 20 odd banks and, you know, essentially, you know,
[Guest 1]: make the taxpayer poorer every year. I mean, there is no reason for you to do that.
[Guest 2]: By the way, if I recall correctly, the stated objective of Government of India is never
[Guest 2]: to dilute its share in any government enterprise under 51%, especially particularly banks.
[Guest 1]: So I think in case of banks, there is some, I mean, constitutional amendment, which needs
[Guest 1]: to be made, if they want the equity to go below 33%.
[Amit Varma]: Wow. So it's essentially unlikely to happen. And we're just going to have the same sorry
[Guest 1]: situation perpetuate itself.
[Guest 1]: Or the taxpayer will sort of pick up the bill gradually over the years.
[Amit Varma]: I'm feeling really proud of myself. How much have I done for this government over the years,
[Guest 1]: Vivek?
[Amit Varma]: Same here.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for coming on the show. We now need to head out of this frivolous podcast and
[Amit Varma]: do some more work because hey, who's going to fund those NPAs?
[Amit Varma]: Let's get on with it.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the Scene and the Unseen, check out another great show by
[Amit Varma]: IVM Podcasts, Made in India, hosted by my friend May Thomas, where every week she profiles
[Amit Varma]: up and coming independent Indian bands.
[Unknown]: Excuse me, Bhaiya. Excuse me.
[Unknown]: Bole Madam.
[Unknown]: Menu mein kya hai?
[Unknown]: Menu mein Scene Unseen hai, Podcast hai, On Cause hai, Cyrus Says hai, Made in India,
[Unknown]: Rediscovery Project, Empowering Series, Sex Wax hai, IVM Likes hai, Simplified hai, Keeping
[Unknown]: it Queer hai, Tings and Destinations hai, My Neighbour Zuckerberg hai, and The Fine Garage
[Unknown]: hai. Aapko kya chahiye hai?
[Unknown]: Ek baar repeat kar denge kya?
[Unknown]: Repeat repeat nahi karta hum. Aap jao ivmpodcast.com pe aur suno yeh sab. Ya phir download karo
[Unknown]: unka app, sab aapki ungliyon pe.